# Tutorial for parsing nionswift projects for electron microscopy

## Scope
This is a draft example which combines a set of configured components of 
NOMAD to collect metadata specific for electron microscopy and combine these with
images and spectrum data processed using the electron-microscopy-centric image
processing software nionswift. This software is used to control electron
microscopes from the Nion Co. Specifically, the tutorial shows how
functionalities of a NOMAD electronic lab notebook (ELN) instance
customized for electron microscopy (currently using NXem as the guiding application
definition), the `em_nion` dataconverter offered through the `pynxtools` NeXus
parser, the `NXem` NeXus data schema, and several NOMAD core functionalities
work together to create nionswift-specific NOMAD entries with respective default
plots for `h5web`.

## Getting started
1. Click the respective button to execute the example.
2. Wait for NOMAD to instantiate the example for you.
3. Check that you are in the `Uploads` section (menu bar).
4. Select the generated upload.
5. Explore its content by clicking on the arrow keys (to the right side of a file).
6. Modify the input file in the NOMAD ELN to match your dataset.
   You can also use the drag-and-drop functionality to drop your
   reconstruction and ranging definition file inside the ELN and remove
   the example reconstruction and ranging file.
   Please note that this is a draft version of the nionswift parser
   and thus it is expected that many specific examples may not work out-of-the
   box.
7. Click `save` to trigger a reprocessing of your upload which will
   update and reprocess the NeXus/HDF5 NXem entries for you.
8. Explore its content via e.g. the preview or via the `Entries`
   (select from the menu bar).

## Which input is supported by this example?
This example works with a ZIP file of the nionswift project directory.
This project dump which can be generated with nionswift (we tested this with
version 0.16.8 of nionswift) contains a guiding nsproj file which resolves
individual locations of files in sub-ordinary directories. These can be nionswift
specific data files, so called ndata files or HDF5 files with the ending h5.
The ZIP file of the project dump can easily be created by just zipping the
entire location with the nsproj file at the top.

The ELN is used to collect metadata which are currently not stored typically in
nionswift. The ELN is configured in this example to collect details about the
specimen, some exemplar additional metadata about the instrument, and users.

## Which data artefacts should I expect to find?
This example upload contains the following entries:
- A schema in NOMAD's *archive.yaml* format: *nxem.schema.archive.yaml*
- A schema instance file as used and generated by NOMAD *emnion.archive.json*.
  For educational purposes this file is filled with values but it is the
  user's responsibility to check that these metadata match their dataset.
- Another schema instance file *eln_data.yaml*. This file contains a plain
  view of all entered/modified quantities including their units. This file is
  updated with clicking the `save` button. This file should not be edited
  manually. Instead, edit the schema instance using the NOMAD GUI.

## Which data schema is used?
Specifically the ELN template is configured such that its terminology matches to
the [NXem](https://fairmat-nfdi.github.io/nexus-fairmat-proposal) NeXus data schema.

## Acknowledgements
This example comes with a real world dataset collected by Benedikt Haas which
contains data and metadata collected for different imaging modes.
[Details can be found here:](https://www.zenodo.org/record/7986279#.ZHh5HKVBxro)

## Where to raise questions, comments, and suggestions?
You are very welcome to approach us with all sorts of questions, and
feature requests. [Markus Kühbach](https://www.fairmat-nfdi.eu/fairmat/about-fairmat/team-fairmat)
is the respective contact person within the FAIRmat consortium.
Feel free and [create a GitHub issue](https://github.com/FAIRmat-NFDI/pynxtools) to point us to
specific questions, experiences, or problems.

## Where to go from now?
Users of nionswift might be interested in our exemplary docker container for
running `nionswift` inside NOMAD using the NOMAD Remote Tools Hub `north`.
There are currently no specific containers for the em_om example.
Details dependent on the specific configuration of your NOMAD OASIS.
